Agregando la traducción del documento Release & Deployment (#8006)
omegaup/omegaup: frontend/www/docs/I-Want-to-Develop-in-omegaUp.md

# I Want to Develop in omegaUp  

> Thank you for your interest in contributing to omegaUp. Here you will find information about the development environment and a brief description of our project.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thank you for your interest in contributing to omegaUp! This guide provides an overview of the development environment and the project structure. 
```

Author: Listo

> If you are not very familiar with omegaUp, please consider first visiting [omegaUp.com](https://omegaup.com/), creating an account, and solving one or two problems on the platform. Then, you can visit [omegaup.org](https://omegaup.org/) to learn more about the organization and the different areas of our work.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're new to omegaUp, we recommend:  
  1. Visiting [omegaUp.com](https://omegaup.com/), creating an account, and solving a few problems.  
  2. Exploring [omegaup.org](https://omegaup.org/) to learn more about our organization and areas of work. 
```

Author: Listo

## Contents  

- [Development Environment](#development-environment)  
- [Architecture (Overview)](#architecture-overview)  
- [Code Structure](#code-structure)  
- [Design Decisions](#design-decisions)  

## Development Environment  

The first step is setting up the development environment. We use Docker for this, and the main operating systems used are Windows and Ubuntu. It can run on macOS, but additional configurations are needed.  

- [Development Environment Installation](https://github.com/omegaup/omegaup/wiki/How-to-Set-Up-Your-Development-Environment-(English)).  

## Architecture (Overview)  

> These are the components of omegaUp and how they connect _(temporary codenames are used)_:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a high-level overview of omegaUp components _(temporary codenames are used)_:  
```

Author: Listo

> - **[UX](https://github.com/omegaup/omegaup/wiki/UX)**: There are two user interface components. _UX_ is the interface for _Arena_, while the rest of the website is generated by _Frontend_.  

Reviewer: Creo que esto es viejo y ya no es necesario
```suggestion
```

Author: Listo

  - **[Runner](https://github.com/omegaup/omegaup/wiki/Runner)**: A decentralized, asynchronous system for compiling and executing programs. Other systems communicate with _Runner_ through a RESTful API. It knows how to compile, execute, and pass input to user-submitted programs and verify their correctness. It is essentially a distributed and user-friendly frontend for _Minijail_.  
  - **Minijail**: A fork of the Linux sandbox used in Chrome OS. It can execute code in C, C++, Perl, Python, Ruby, Java, and Karel. Written in C.  

For more details, you can refer to two papers published in the IOI journal:  

- Luis Héctor CHÁVEZ, Alan GONZÁLEZ, Joemmanuel PONCE.  
  [omegaUp: Cloud-Based Contest Management System and Training Platform in the Mexican Olympiad in Informatics](http://ioinformatics.org/oi/pdf/v8_2014_169_178.pdf).  
- Luis Héctor CHÁVEZ.  
  [libinteractive: A Better Way to Write Interactive Tasks](https://ioinformatics.org/journal/v9_2015_3_14.pdf).  

## Code Structure  

> The code is located in `/opt/omegaup`. The development installation includes two pre-configured accounts: `omegaup` (administrator) and `user` (regular user). Their passwords are `omegaup` and `user`, respectively.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code is located in `/opt/omegaup`. The development installation includes two pre-configured accounts: 
| Username  | Password  | Role        |  
|-----------|----------|------------|  
| `omegaup` | `omegaup` | Administrator |  
| `user`    | `user`    | Regular user |   
```

Author: Listo

- **[frontend/templates](https://github.com/omegaup/omegaup/tree/main/frontend/templates)**: Contains internationalization files for English, Spanish, and Portuguese, as well as the main template loading libraries used across all views (e.g., Bootstrap).  

### You may find these useful:  

- [Coding Guidelines](https://github.com/omegaup/omegaup/wiki/Coding-guidelines-(English-version)).  
- [Useful Development Commands](https://github.com/omegaup/omegaup/wiki/Useful-Commands-for-Development).  

## Design Decisions  

- **Encryption for everything**: All communication with omegaUp and its subsystems must be encrypted, both client-to-server and between components. This prevents cheating in contests (e.g., packet sniffing in a programming competition) and mitigates attacks like Firesheep.  

> - **Facebook Connect / OAuth / OpenID**: We aim to minimize the number of passwords in the system. Using any identity federation system makes the internet a better place. Users should be able to link multiple identities (e.g., a student registered with `user@email.com` via OpenID should be able to confirm ownership of `a0001@school.mx` and merge both accounts).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **OAuth & Identity Management**: We support federated authentication to minimize password use. Users can link multiple identities (e.g., a student’s school email with an external OpenID account). 
```

Author: Listo

> - **Component Decoupling**: Some _Frontend_ functionality will eventually migrate to _Arena_, so components must remain as independent as possible.  

Reviewer: Esto aun es vigente? Sino hay que borrarlo

Author: Parece que ya no. Se va

- **Programming Languages**:  
  - Backend: Go/C  
  - Frontend: PHP+MySQL  
  - UX: Vue.js+TypeScript  

> ### Continue...  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Next steps
```

Author: Listo
